I'm just going to indulge myself with one more Maytals
Which again, is something I've never heard of
[music plays]
I'm Joe Boyd
I was, and to a certain degree still am, a record producer, for many years...
...but more of a writer now.
I'm in the middle of working on a book about the dubious subject called World Music.
I live in London, I am a record collector - have been since I was 11.
And I still have some of the vinyl that I bought in my early teens
John Peel's record collection has always been a sort of golden mountain in the distance...
...you know that kind of legendary place. You know he talked about it...
...people had written about it... it's a legendary spot so I'm very pleased...
...and honoured to be invited to come have a look around
This is the room where the shows were put together
Liverpool football
There was definitely something happening in this, if we go into the Seventies, the Sixties
I think any art form, it's most interesting when it's new.
Hell, rock and roll wasn't new in the Sixties, what was new, was middle class kids coming into it...
...and with The Beatles and Dylan and Jagger and Richards...
...you had people who were outside the music studying it, going into it with a different perspective
So all that stuff is so fresh, and then the Seventies for me...
...people start to go over the same ground again, or change it.
You know punk was a great sociological thing...
...but it wasn't for me as interesting as some of the earlier manifestations of this.
I'm a great believer in randomness
I just like the idea of opening something at random
The Fall, I cross a lot of Fall records, right that one would expect
But there we go, there's Art Farmer and Donald Bird...
...two great trumpet players
Art Farmer, Gary Farr and the T-Bones.
Gary Farr and the T-bones were playing at the Marquee Club when I was first in Soho in 1965.
Not that great but...
...Joe Farrell, the Joe Farrell Quartet, I mean this is triggering so many memories.
Well, this is a bit
I mean even for me, with my 6000 LP's at home, this is quite overwhelming.
35.5
[music plays]
I mean, this is a good record, but it's a great record cover...
...a lesson in how to make a great record cover.
Blue Thumb Records, a kind of a maverick record company.
I mean just so outrageous...
...Ike and Tina Turner, in whiteface, eating watermelon.
Mick Farren, my god, you see random
Mick Farren, the worst singer ever to make a record, probably.
I think we're in the early days of John's collecting here
The Soft Machine, who used to play at UFO as well as Pink Floyd.
The thing I loved about The Soft Machine was Robert Wyatt's singing...
...even when he was a drummer, he used to sing from the drumkit.
Really good drummer, vocal mike coming over his head
Great, I mean not that many people can sing well from a drumkit, and he's one of them.
This is so interesting cause it's that phenomenon that we know, we hear about, legendarily...
...of sound systems scratching out titles so that nobody else will know what the song is.
And it was started back in the fifties, when the Jamaican cane workers were going to Florida
and realised that DJ's loved getting American records, and once they got one they didn't...
...want anyone to know what it was so they couldn't send for someone to get it in Florida either...
...so they'd scratch out the titles.
'Thatcher on Acid', good name, don't know them.
Let's see, what have I got in the box.
This is a record that I don't have anymore, that I used to have...
...'The Rural Blues', compiled and annotated by Sam Charters, a great pioneer of blues studies.
Chess' Golden Decade, this just looks like an amazing record, it's Chess Records' Golden Decade.
It's got Bobby Charles, who was a great character out of Louisiana, who wrote 'See You Later Alligator'...
...and Bill Haley had a big hit with it.
'Sincerely' by The Moonglows, which is one of the great Doo-Wop records of all time.
Howlin' Wolf, 'Smokestack Lightning', Clarence 'Frogman' Henry, 'Ain't got no Home'
Jimmy Mccracklin, 'The Walk', Dale Hawkins, 'Susie Q'
My god, The Monotones - 'Book of Love', this is an extraordinary collection.
The Purple Gang, a jug band from Macclesfield Ladies and Gentlemen, who I did a single with...
...this is such a great cover, very Lancashire.
One of the worst covers ever to grace a record I produced, my friend Geoff Muldaur...
...'Is Having a Wonderful Time', this is taken at Speakers' Corner in London...
...when he came over to work on the record in London, with some devout Christians praying.
They weren't posed, they were actually praying.
Boz Scaggs, the young Boz Scaggs having just left Steve Miller, very 1970's I'd say, this cover...
...little half moon, the kind of slightly Macclesfield parish-esque illustration.
What else have we got here? I'm doing a critique of the covers as well.
This is a good cover, Thomas Mapfumo and the Blacks Unlimited, probably out in the bush with the rebels.
75.5
[music plays]
This music is such a great example of an African culture taking it's own traditions...
...and adapting it to electric guitars and modern modernity in a way.
Because that beat, that whole pattern of the rhythm guitars is Mbira, it's a thumb piano
and that's the basics in music of that part of Africa, is that singing while accompanying yourself on thumb piano.
And Mapfumo was just the master of all of that, he would record singles that would be coded messages
you know, while the troops were still fighting in the bush, and eventually he was you know
sort of the Poet Laureate of the revolution in Zimbabwe.
Moby Grape, pretty good classic... I don't know what exactly.
Sixties, haircuts, everything. The extended middle finger on the washboard.
Them, featuring Van Morrison, early Van Morrison, with that classic 'Here Comes the Night'.
'The Rooster Crowed in England', Sam 'Lightning' Hopkins, not quite sure what...
...the rooster has to do with 'Lightning' Hopkins.
Great original cover.
Well, this is a record that kind of changed the world and it wasn't even a record.
It was a demo, it was a publishers demo, Bob Dylan.
The beginning of this period, 1965, was when Dylan had made a record, Highway 61 Revisited
and he put out a single, six minute long single: 'Like a Rolling Stone'.
It had, y'know that organ riff that Al Cooper did, and drums and bass
it was on the radio, it was all over the place
and I was the production manager for the Newport Folk Festival...
...in the summer of 1965, and all anyone could talk about was
What's Dylan gonna do?
He wouldn't dare, he wouldn't bring his band, he wouldn't play with a band...
...at the Folk Festival, would he?
He'd never played live with a band, and yes he did, and it was amazing.
And Alan Lomax and Pete Seeger came over to me and said, you've got to turn the sound down...
...it's way too loud, and I went up to the sound controls in the middle of the audience.
Albert Grossman was there, Dylan's manager, and Paul Rothchild, who was mixing the sound,
who I'd brought up to mix the sound.
And Peter Yarrow, from Peter, Paul and Mary, and Peter was like the token young person on...
...the board of the Newport Folk foundation.
And I came over and I gave the message from Lomax and Seeger, and Peter said
'Tell Alan that the Board of the festival is represented at the sound controls, and the representative out here...
thinks the sound is just fine'.
And I turned to go and he said, 'Oh Joe, tell him'...
I mean that was that atmosphere, it was so tense, it was so hostile between the generations,
and I think it really did change everything.
The Folk Festival was never the same, Folk Music was never the same, Jazz was never the same
because all those Jazz clubs started becoming rock clubs
and the kind of non-conformist kids that used to wear black turtlenecks, and smoke coburns and listen to Miles Davis
were suddenly at Grateful Dead shows taking acid.
And then Dylan had the motorcycle accident, and went off and disappeared,
and all of a sudden there was these whispers went around Soho in London, that there was a demo...
...at Feldman's Music which was on Charring Cross Road, just up the Road from Dobell's record store.
And you could go in there, they wouldn't give you a copy, you could go in there and listen to the demo.
And Julie Driscoll and Brian Auger and The Trinity, covered 'This Wheel's on Fire'.
Manfred Mann covered 'Quinn the Eskimo' from this demo.
Fairport Convention covered 'Million Dollar Bash', on 'Unhalfbricking'.
I remember that day, we all went in, and crowded into this tiny listening booth...
...and the Professional Manager from Feldman's came out and took the record and put it on the turntable
and dropped the needle, and we were all just like... wow.
You know it was just an incredible experience to listen to it, and to see this thing.
I mean it's been reissued and bootlegged and you can see it at the 'Great White Wonder' and all sorts of places,
but I have a feeling that this might be the proper acetate
Yes, it's definitely a test pressing.
130.5
[music plays]
I was working with the Fairport, we'd already done two records
and we were in the middle of making this one, 'Unhalfbricking'.
And I got a call from Simon Nicol, and he said 'We've got a couple of new numbers we'd like you to hear...
...can you come down to one of our gigs?'
So I drove down to Bristol, went to this ballroom of some kind,
and in the middle of the set
they said that they'd learnt this song from Sandy Denny, who was their singer now.
And she used to play British folk songs in the van, as they were driving around,
or in the dressing room, while they were waiting around,
and they'd liked this song and they did an arrangement of it.
It was 'A Sailors Life', and I went backstage after and I said
'Yeah we've gotta record this, it's fantastic'.
And then they said to me 'We were thinking, what if we got somebody, a traditional musician...
...like Dave Swarbrick to play on it.
And then I said 'If you want Dave Swarbrick, I'll call up Swarbrick'.
And they said 'D'you know Swarbrick?'
And they'd suddenly discovered this world of English Folk music that they knew nothing about.
They were all oriented towards American Folk Rock
and they were the classic English kids who didn't like Folk music.
They didn't dislike it, they were more open minded than most, but they had never taken it seriously.
And all of a sudden just this one tune, they thought, let's do this, we like this tune.
And so I called Swarbrick and he came in and he played violin,
and this was like a first take, maybe one run through, and then we did this take.
Richard and Swarbrick kept swapping solos, and it changed the game in English Folk music.
Which actually brings us directly to the next one because Nick Drake.
His story is very connected to Fairport and to that whole period of Fairport
which was after the six month period where Martin has died, the group almost broke up
then they went out to the farm in the country, and woodshedded, and invented themselves all over again.
And we put out 'Liege and Lief' and three weeks later we had this date at the Festival Hall.
And the impact of the record was such and everybody knew what had happened
that Melody Maker was all over the story, people had been out to interview them
talked about how exciting what they were doing was.
And so, the place was sold out, and it was very respectful, because of the grave circumstances.
And so I had John and Beverley Martyn open the show,
Cause Fairport didn't have, probably if they'd had a big repertoire by that time,
we would have had them do the whole concert.
But they didn't, they only had an hour's worth of tunes. That's all they knew.
They had completely invented a new repertoire.
So we had to have them do the second half of the concert.
The first half, half an hour from John and Beverley, half an hour from Nick.
And we had John and Beverley first because I knew that sending Nick out to open a show was gonna be fatal.
So at least John could tell some jokes and Beverley could be funny and friendly
and they would warm everybody up, and then Nick would have his slot before the interval.
And everybody was incredibly respectful, and it was fantastic, it was so thrilling.
You could hear a pin drop, and Nick didn't say a word, but he was flawless. Perfect.
And people were completely mesmerised, and gave him a huge ovation and he had to do an encore.
This was right after this record came out, and we were all just
'It can happen, it can happen'.
We were so happy, everybody in the office loved Nick. But we got overconfident because of that.
We thought, okay now we can send him out.
And we sent him out on this tour and it was just a disaster.
The circumstances were never the same.
And so he called up after four days and said 'I can't do this anymore'.
And cancelled the rest of the tour. Never played live again.
184.5
[music plays]
Not too sure about this cover, but hey, it's got the beautiful Syd in the middle.
Which is all you really need.
So it kind of works in a way.
And this is of course the record that, I feel tragically, I didn't get to produce.
After we did the deal with EMI, EMI said 'No no no, we've gotta have our in house producer'.
And this is the record that I produced thanks to John Peel.
Because he introduced me to them and told them about me and me about them.
Charlie Mingus, I just chose this. This is a reissue, so this isn't the original cover.
The original cover is more interesting.
But still, anything that has a picture of Charlie Mingus can't be all bad.
This is a very very good cover I think, 'Brian Jones presents The Pipes of Pan at Jajouka'.
Brian's venture into Moroccan Trance music.
And then we have some singles.
'The Intro and The Outro' by Bonzo Dog Doo-Dah Band.
'Say You Don't Mind' by Denny Laine. Great record.
'My White Bicycle' by Tomorrow.
What's this? My White Bicycle, the original mono version.
Single, that's good, okay let's have that.
Now a little nerdy collectors point, but also relevant to this history.
At UFO in the spring of '67, after Pink Floyd had broken out, and Soft Machine had kind of broken out
what we had was a small place, we couldn't pay a lot of money.
And so they were making bigger money elsewhere, I was always on the lookout for new groups.
And somebody recommended this group 'Tomorrow', and I went and heard them at Blazes'
I bought them down to UFO and people just adored them.
It was such an interesting time because, there were these pioneering groups
like Pink Floyd and Soft Machine, who were already into kind of taking music in another direction.
But then there were these bands like Pretty Things, Tomorrow, The Nice
all these bands that had been blues bands, or straight pop bands of various kinds.
Then somewhere in the winter or spring of '67, they all took acid.
And the music just completely changed and became this much weirder kind of music and we used to book them at UFO.
And Tomorrow was one of them, and they had this number called 'My White Bicycle', which was a great song...
...we used to play it all the time, the record and the group came down, people loved it when they played it.
And it just became the symbol of the second era of UFO.
UFO only lasted nine months in all but it did have actual periods, different eras within that nine months.
Arnold Layne.
The atmosphere of when Pink Floyd played live before they went on to have their hit singles...
...was these long extended improvisations that Syd Barrett used to do.
And even when you started with a tune, like 'Arnold Layne', they would then go into these long improvisations...
...and then return to the song.
And the inspiration for that: this record.
But there is here, an astonishment for me because I never would have imagined that John would have this.
This is one of the few records that I feel I ought to have but I don't.
So, search me as I leave.
This is a very very obscure record, but kind of legendary. AMMMusic.
Cornelius Cardew, Keith Rowe. This was the most out of the Avant-Garde, Abstract music scene...
...in the Sixties in London. Cornelius Cardew the famous composer, piano player.
And John Hopkins, my partner at UFO knew all these guys, he was into this stuff.
And he convinced me, I don't know why I agreed, when I was running the Elektra Records office in London
to make a record with these guys, and it was all done in one evening, at Sound Techniques...
...It was one of the first things I ever did at Sound Techniques, which was where I ended up recording...
...Nick Drake and Pink Floyd and everything.
But the other guy involved was Peter Jenner, who was also involved with the London Free School.
And he was a big fan of these guys, and he took Syd Barrett when he came down from Cambridge...
...to see these guys, and Syd you know was writing all these nice songs...
...these cute, funny, weird songs like 'Arnold Layne' and 'Candy in a Current Bun' and all this kind of stuff.
But when he heard these guys, this is where he got the idea to start doing all these abstract...
...noises on the guitar.
And, in a way, some people would say that this record was one of the formative things...
...in the creation that we now think of as Pink Floyd.
You know the long extended solos, and the abstract ventures into space with the guitar
and it all comes from here.
'Take Me to The River' Al Green sung by David Byrne.
And, one of the revelations of the day, 'The Struggle' by Toots and the Maytals.
Never heard it before, want to hear it again.
248.5
[music plays]
I'd never even heard of this track.